<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Notes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="afterword" epub:type="afterword">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Notes</h2>
			<section id="afterword-polish-alphabet">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Polish Alphabet</h3>
				<p>Since the Polish alphabet has many peculiar phonetic combinations which are difficult to one who does not know the language, it was decided to transliterate the names of persons and places in which such combinations occur in this book. The following are the letters and combinations which are met with most frequently:⁠—</p>
				<table>
					<thead>
						<tr>
							<th>Polish Letters</th>
							<th>English Sounds</th>
						</tr>
					</thead>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">c</i>
							</td>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ts</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">cz</i>
							</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ch</i> in “chief”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">sz</i>
							</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">sh</i> in “ship”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">szcz</i>
							</td>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">shch</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">rz</i>
							</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">r</i> followed by the French <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="fr">j</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">w</i>
							</td>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">v</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">ż</i>
							</td>
							<td><i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="fr">j</i> in French</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>In this transliteration <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">ch</i> retains its ordinary English sound. <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">Kh</i> is used as the German <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="de">ch</i>, or the Gaelic <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="gd">ch</i> in “loch;” so is <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">h</i>, as in Hmelnitski, and a few names in which it is used at the beginning and preceding a consonant, where it has the power of the German <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="de">ch</i>. <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">J</i> is the French <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="fr">j</i>; the vowels <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">e</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">i</i>, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">u</i>, are, respectively, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ai</i> in “bait,” <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ee</i> in “beet,” <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">oo</i> in “pool,” when long; when short, “bet,” “bit,” “put” would represent their values.</p>
				<p>The following names will illustrate the method of this transliteration:⁠—</p>
				<table>
					<thead>
						<tr>
							<th>Polish Form of Name</th>
							<th>Form in Transliteration</th>
						</tr>
					</thead>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>Potocki</td>
							<td>Pototski</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Kulczinski</td>
							<td>Kulchinski</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Gdeszinski</td>
							<td>Gdeshinski</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Leszczinski</td>
							<td>Leshchinski</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Rzendzian</td>
							<td>Jendzian</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Woronczenko</td>
							<td>Voronchenko</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Żabkowski</td>
							<td>Jabkovski</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>In Jendzian the initial <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme" xml:lang="pl">R</i> has been omitted, on account of the extreme difficulty of its sound to anyone not a Pole. In Skrzetuski, a very difficult name also, <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">sh</i> has been used instead of the French <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="fr">j</i>, because in this word the two sounds are almost identical, and the sound of <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">sh</i> is known to all, while <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="fr">j</i> is not.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="afterword-polish-accent">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Accent</h3>
				<p>All Polish words, with few exceptions, are accented on the syllable next the last, the penult. The exceptions are foreign names, some compounds, some words with enclitics. Polish names of men and places are generally accented on the penult. In Russian⁠—both of the Ukraine and the North, or of Little and Great Russia⁠—there is much freedom in placing the accent. In this book there are many Russian names of men and places; but the majority of names are accented on the penult. It has been thought best, therefore, to state this fact, and place accents only on words accented on syllables other than the penult. Some of these were accented in the body of the book; the rest are accented here. The following names of men are accented on the last syllable:⁠—</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>Balaban</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Barabash</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Bogun</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Burdabut</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Chernota</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>The following names of places are accented as indicated:⁠—</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>Bakche Serai̍</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Bazalu̍k</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Be̍lgorod</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Bo̍guslav</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Ga̍lata</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Hassan Pasha̍</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Ka̍menyets</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Korova̍i</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Mi̍rgorod</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Pereko̍p</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Seki̍rnaya</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Sle̍porod</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Volochi̍sk</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Yagorli̍k</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>Polish names in <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">ski</i> and <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">vich</i> are adjectives, regularly declined, with masculine and feminine endings. The titles of address <i xml:lang="pl">Pan</i>, <i xml:lang="pl">Pani</i>, <i xml:lang="pl">Panna</i>, refer respectively to a gentleman, a married lady, an unmarried lady. The following are examples:⁠—</p>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>Pan Kurtsevich,</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Pani Kurtsevichova,</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Panna Kurtsevichovna.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
				<p>These three forms when applied to one family refer to the father, mother, and an unmarried daughter.</p>
				<p>The ending in <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">ski</i> is not so complicated; for instance⁠—</p>
				<ul>
					<li>Pan Pototski,</li>
					<li>Pani Pototska,</li>
					<li>Panna Pototska.</li>
				</ul>
				<p>The names in <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">vich</i> denote descent; those in <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">ski</i>, origin in, or lordship over, a place.</p>
				<p>Nikolai Pototski, Grand Hetman, captured at Korsún, was Pan Pototski, which means lord of Potok (Potok being the name of the place which he inherited); he was also Pan Krakovski, lord of Krakov (Krakow), because he was castellan of Krakov (Krakow), an office to which he was appointed by the king.</p>
				<p>The names of villages which Zagloba mentions as belonging to Podbipienta are curious enough, whether real or invented by the whimsical narrator; as is also the name Povsinoga, which he gives the tall Lithuanian, and which means “tramp.” The villages⁠—taken in the order in which he gives them on page 540⁠—Myshikishki, Psikishki, Pigvishki, Sirutsiani, Tsiaputsiani, Kapustsiana glowa, Baltupye, are⁠—excluding the first two, the meanings of which are given on page 20⁠—Crabapple town, Homespunville, Simpletown, Cabbagehead, and Slabtown.</p>
				<p>The soup <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">botvinia</i>, mentioned in connection with Podbipienta and Pan Kharlamp, which is made of vegetables and fish in eastern Russia, may be made, it seems, without fish in Lithuania. The word is used figuratively to designate a rustic or stay-at-home villager.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="afterword-polish-offices-and-things">
				<h3 epub:typw="title">Offices and Things</h3>
				<p><dfn>Balalaika</dfn>, a stringed instrument used in southern Russia, resembling the guitar.</p>
				<p><dfn>Ca̍stellan</dfn>, the chief of a town or city under Polish rule, as well as the district connected with it. The castellan was always a senator, and was appointed by the king.</p>
				<p><dfn xml:lang="und">Chambul</dfn>, a party of mounted Tartars.</p>
				<p><dfn xml:lang="und">Koshevo̍i</dfn>, chief of a Cossack camp.</p>
				<p><dfn xml:lang="und">Kure̍n</dfn>, a company or group of Cossacks as well as the barracks in which they lived.</p>
				<p><dfn xml:lang="pl">Sotnik</dfn>, a captain of Cossacks. This word is exactly equivalent to “centurion,” and is derived from <i xml:lang="pl">sto</i>, “one hundred,” with the nominative ending <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="pl">nik</i>.</p>
				<p><dfn>Stanitsa</dfn>, a Cossack village.</p>
				<p><dfn>Sta̍rosta</dfn>, chief of a town under Polish control.</p>
				<p><dfn xml:lang="und">Starshini̍</dfn>, elders. This word meant for the Cossacks the whole body of their officers.</p>
				<p><dfn>Telega</dfn>, the ordinary springless wagon of Russia, smaller than the country wagon in the United States.</p>
				<p><dfn>Teorba̍n</dfn>, or <dfn>Torba̍n</dfn>, a large musical instrument of twenty strings or more.</p>
				<p><dfn>Voevoda</dfn>, governor and commander of troops in a province, corresponding to the military governor of modern times. This office was common to the Poles and the Russians of the East or Moscow.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
