<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-46" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XLVI</h2>
			<p>Prince Yeremi heard of the slaying of Bogun with notable indifference, especially when he learned that there were men outside his regiments who were ready at any moment to testify that Volodyovski had been challenged. If the affair had not happened just before the announcement of Yan Kazimir’s election, if the struggle of the candidates had been still going on, the opponents of Yeremi and at their head the chancellor would certainly not have failed to forge weapons against him out of this event, in spite of all witnesses and testimony. But after Prince Karl’s withdrawal, men’s minds were occupied with other things, and it was easy to foresee that the whole affair would be drowned in oblivion. Hmelnitski, it is true, might raise it to show what new injuries he was enduring every day; but Yeremi justly hoped that Prince Kazimir in sending his answer would order it to be stated from himself how the envoy had perished, and Hmelnitski would not dare to doubt the truth of the prince’s words.</p>
			<p>Yeremi was anxious only that no political disturbance should rise through his soldiers. On the other hand he was glad, on Skshetuski’s account, of what had happened, for the finding of Kurtsevichovna was really much more likely now. It was possible to find her, to rescue or ransom her; and the prince would surely not spare the outlay, no matter how great, if only he could save his favorite knight from suffering and restore his happiness.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski went to the prince in great apprehension; for though in general he had little timidity, still he feared as he did fire every frown of the voevoda’s brow. What was his astonishment then and joy when the prince, after he had heard the report and meditated awhile on what had happened, took a costly ring from his finger and said⁠—</p>
			<p>“I praise your moderation for not attacking him first, for a great and harmful uproar might have arisen at the Diet from that. But if the princess shall be found, Skshetuski will be indebted to you for life. Reports reach me, Volodyovski, that as others are unable to keep their tongues behind their lips, you are unable to keep your sabre in its scabbard, for which punishment is due you. But since you took the part of a friend and sustained the reputation of our regiments with such a famous hero, take this ring, so as to have some memento of this day. I knew that you were a good soldier and famous at the sword, but this is like a master of masters.”</p>
			<p>“He!” said Zagloba. “He would cut the devil’s horns off at the third round. If your Highness should ever have my head cut off, then I ask that no one else cut it but him, for at least I should go to the other world straightway. He cut Bogun in two in the breast, and then passed twice through his wits.”</p>
			<p>The prince was fond of knightly affairs and good soldiers; he smiled therefore with pleasure and asked: “Have you ever found your match at the sabre?”</p>
			<p>“Skshetuski hacked me a little once, but I paid him back the time your Highness put us both behind the bars. Among others Pan Podbipienta might meet me, for he has power beyond human; and Kushel almost, if he had better eyes.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t believe him, your Highness! no man can stand before him.”</p>
			<p>“And Bogun fought long?”</p>
			<p>“I had grievous work. He knew how to throw the sabre from the right to the left hand.”</p>
			<p>“Bogun told me himself,” interrupted Zagloba, “that he fought with the Kurtsevichi whole days for practice, and I saw myself how he did the same with others in Chigirin.”</p>
			<p>“Do you know what you would better do, Volodyovski?” said the prince, with pretended seriousness; “go to Zamost, challenge Hmelnitski, and with one blow free the Commonwealth from all its defeats and anxieties.”</p>
			<p>“I will go at your Highness’s order, if Hmelnitski wishes to meet me,” answered Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>To which the prince answered: “We are joking, and the world is perishing! But you, gentlemen, must really go to Zamost. I have news from the Cossack camp that the moment Prince Kazimir’s election is declared, Hmelnitski will raise the siege and withdraw to Russia, which he will do from real or simulated affection for the king, or because his power might more easily be broken at Zamost. Therefore you must go and tell Skshetuski what has happened, so that he may set out to look for the princess. Tell him to choose from my squadrons with the starosta of Valets as many soldiers as may be necessary for the expedition. Besides, I shall send him permission by you and give him a letter, for his happiness is very near my heart.”</p>
			<p>“Your Highness, you are a father to us all; therefore we desire to remain in faithful service to you while we live.”</p>
			<p>“I am not sure that my service will not soon be a hungry one,” said the prince, “if all my fortune beyond the Dnieper is lost; but while it lasts, what is mine is yours.”</p>
			<p>“Oh,” cried Volodyovski, “our poor fortunes will always be at the disposal of your Highness.”</p>
			<p>“And mine with the rest,” added Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“That is not necessary yet,” answered the prince, kindly. “I still entertain the hope that if I lose everything the Commonwealth will at least remember my children.”</p>
			<p>Speaking thus, the prince seemed to have a moment of second sight. The Commonwealth in fact a few years later gave to his only son the best it had⁠—that is, the crown; but at that time the gigantic fortune of Yeremi was really shattered.</p>
			<p>“Well, we got out of it,” said Zagloba, when both had left the prince. “Pan Michael, you may be sure of promotion. But let us see the ring. Upon my word, it is worth about one hundred ducats, for the stone is very beautiful. Ask any Armenian in the bazaar to-morrow. For such an amount we might swim in eating and drinking and other delights. What do you think, Pan Michael? The soldier’s maxim is: ‘To-day I live, to-morrow decay;’ and the sense of it is this⁠—that it isn’t worth while to think of to-morrow. Short is the life of man, Pan Michael. The great thing is this, that henceforth the prince will carry you in his heart. He would give ten times as much to make a present of Bogun to Skshetuski, and you have done it. You may expect great favors, believe me! Are the villages few that the prince has given to knights for life, or made presents of outright? What is such a ring as this? Surely some income will fall to you, and to wind up, the prince will give you one of his relatives in marriage.”</p>
			<p>Pan Michael jumped up. “How do you know that⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That what?”</p>
			<p>“I wanted to say, what have you got in your head? How could such a thing take place?”</p>
			<p>“But does it not take place? Are you not a noble, or are not all nobles equal? Are the distant relatives, male and female, of every magnate among the nobles few in number? These relatives he gives in marriage to his most important men. Very likely Sufchinski of Senchy married some distant relative of the Vishnyevetskis. Though some of us serve, we are all brothers, Pan Michael⁠—all brothers, since we are all descended in common from Japhet, and the whole difference is in fortune and offices to which each may arrive. There are likely enough in some other countries considerable differences between nobles, but they are mangy nobles. I understand differences between dogs; there are, for instance, pointers, and there are hounds of various kinds. But consider, Pan Michael, it cannot be so among nobles; for then we should be dog-brothers, not nobles⁠—which disgrace to such an honorable order Thou wilt not permit, O Lord!”</p>
			<p>“You speak truly,” said Volodyovski; “but then the Vishnyevetskis are kingly stock, almost.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, Pan Michael, just as if you are not eligible to the throne! I, first of all, would vote for you, if I should make up my mind like Pan Sigismond Skarshevski, who swears that he will vote for himself unless he is ruined at dice. Everything, thank God, with us is obtained by free vote; our poverty, not our birth, stands in the way.”</p>
			<p>“That’s the case precisely,” sighed Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>“What’s to be done? We are plundered to the last, and we shall be lost if the Commonwealth doesn’t provide some income for us,” said Zagloba, “and we shall perish miserably. What wonder is it if a man, though by nature abstemious, should like to get drunk under such oppressions? Let us go, Pan Michael, and drink a glass of small beer; we shall comfort ourselves even a little.”</p>
			<p>Thus conversing, they reached the old town and entered a wine-shop, before which a number of attendants were holding the shubas and burkas of nobles who were drinking inside. Having seated themselves before a table, they ordered a decanter and began to take counsel as to what they should do now, after the killing of Bogun.</p>
			<p>“If Hmelnitski should leave Zamost and peace follow, then the princess is ours,” said Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“We must go to Skshetuski at once, and not let him off till he finds the girl.”</p>
			<p>“True, we will go at once; but now there is no way of getting to Zamost.”</p>
			<p>“That’s all the same, if only God will favor us later.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba raised his glass. “He will, he will,” said he. “Do you know, Pan Michael, what I’ll tell you?”</p>
			<p>“What is it?”</p>
			<p>“Bogun is killed.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski looked at him with astonishment. “Yes; who should know that better than I?”</p>
			<p>“May your hands be holy! you know and I know. I saw how you fought; you are now before my eyes, and still I must repeat it to myself continually, for at times it seems as though I had only some kind of a dream. What a care has been removed! what a knot your sabre cut! May the bullets strike you! for God knows, this is too great to be told. No, I cannot restrain myself; let me press you once again, Pan Michael. If you will believe, when I made your acquaintance I thought to myself: ‘There is a little whipper-snapper.’ A nice whipper-snapper, to slash Bogun in this fashion! Bogun is gone; no trace, no ashes of him⁠—slain to death for the ages of ages; amen!”</p>
			<p>Here Zagloba began to hug and kiss Volodyovski, and Pan Michael was moved to tears as if sorry for Bogun. At last, however, he freed himself from Zagloba’s embraces and said: “We were not present at his death, and he is hard to kill. Suppose he recovers?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, in God’s name, what are you talking about?” said Zagloba. “I should be ready to go to-morrow to Lipki and arrange the nicest funeral for him, just after his death.”</p>
			<p>“Why should you go? You wouldn’t finish a wounded man. After the sabre, whoever does not yield his breath at once is likely to pull through. A sabre is not a bullet.”</p>
			<p>“He cannot recover. He was already in the death-agony when we left. No chance of recovery! I examined his wounds myself. Let him rest, for you cut him open like a hare. We must go to Skshetuski at once and comfort him, or he may die of gnawing grief.”</p>
			<p>“Or he will become a monk; he told me so himself.”</p>
			<p>“What wonder? I should do the same in his place. I do not know a more honorable knight, and a more unhappy one I do not know. The Lord visits him grievously.”</p>
			<p>“Leave off,” said Volodyovski, a little drunk, “for I am not able to stop my tears.”</p>
			<p>“Neither am I,” added Zagloba; “such an honorable knight, and such a soldier! But the princess⁠—you do not know her; such a darling!”</p>
			<p>Here Zagloba began to howl in a low bass, for he really loved the princess; and Pan Michael accompanied him in a higher key, and they drank wine mixed with tears. Then, dropping their heads on their breasts, they sat for a time gloomily, till Zagloba struck his fist on the table.</p>
			<p>“Pan Michael, why do we weep? Bogun is killed!”</p>
			<p>“True,” said Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“We ought rather to rejoice. We are fools now if we don’t find her.”</p>
			<p>“Let us go,” said Volodyovski, rising.</p>
			<p>“Let us drink,” corrected Zagloba. “God grant us to hold their children at the christening, and all because we slew Bogun.”</p>
			<p>“Served him right!” finished Volodyovski, not noticing that Zagloba was already sharing with him the merit of killing Bogun.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
