<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>LXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-63" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">LXIII</h2>
			<p>Skshetuski slept a number of days, and when he woke he had a violent fever, and suffered long. He talked of Zbaraj, of the prince, of the starosta of Krasnovstav; he talked with Pan Michael, with Zagloba; he cried, “Not this way!” to Pan Longin; of the princess alone he spoke not a word. It was clear that the great power with which he had confined in himself the memory of her did not desert him a moment even in weakness and pain. At that moment, he seemed to see hanging over him the chubby face of Jendzian, precisely as he saw it when the prince after the battle of Konstantinoff sent him with troops to Zaslav to cut down lawless bands, and Jendzian appeared to him unexpectedly at his night quarters. This face brought confusion to his mind; for it seemed to him that time halted in its flight, and that nothing had changed from that period. So he is again at Khomor, is sleeping in the cottage, is marching to Tarnopol to give over his troops; Krívonos, beaten at Konstantinoff, has fled to Hmelnitski; Jendzian has come from Gushchi, and sits with him. Skshetuski wanted to talk⁠—wanted to order the lad to have the horse saddled⁠—but could not. And again it comes into his head that he is not at Khomor; that since that time too was the taking of Bar. Here Skshetuski halted in his pain, and his unfortunate head sank in darkness. He knows nothing now, sees nothing; but at times out of that chaos comes the heroism of Zbaraj, the siege. He is not at Khomor then? But still Jendzian is sitting over him, bending toward him. Through an opening in the shutters a narrow bright ray comes into the room, and lights completely the face of the youth, full of care and sympathy.</p>
			<p>“Jendzian!” cried Skshetuski, suddenly.</p>
			<p>“Oh, my master! do you know me already?” cried the youth, and fell at the feet of his master. “I thought you would never wake again!”</p>
			<p>A moment of silence followed; only the sobbing of the youth could be heard as he continued to press the feet of his master.</p>
			<p>“Where am I?” asked Skshetuski.</p>
			<p>“In Toporoff. You came from Zbaraj to the king. Praise be to God!”</p>
			<p>“And where is the king?”</p>
			<p>“He went with the army to rescue the prince.’ ”</p>
			<p>Silence followed. Tears of joy continued to flow along the face of Jendzian, who after a while began to repeat with a voice of emotion: “That I should look on your body again!” Then he opened the shutters and the window.</p>
			<p>Fresh morning air came into the room, and with it the bright light of day. With this light came all Skshetuski’s presence of mind. Jendzian sat at the foot of the bed.</p>
			<p>“Then I came out of Zbaraj?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my master. No one could do that but you, and on your account the king went to the rescue.”</p>
			<p>“Pan Podbipienta tried before me, but he perished⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, for God’s sake! Pan Podbipienta⁠—such a liberal man, so virtuous! My breath leaves me. How could they kill such a strong man?”</p>
			<p>“They shot him with arrows.”</p>
			<p>“And Pan Volodyovski and Zagloba?”</p>
			<p>“They were well when I came out.”</p>
			<p>“Praise be to God! They are great friends of yours, my master⁠—But the priest won’t let me talk.”</p>
			<p>Jendzian was silent, and for a time was working at something with his head. Thoughtfulness was expressed on his ruddy face. After a while he said: “My master?”</p>
			<p>“Well, what is it?”</p>
			<p>“What will be done with the fortune of Pan Podbipienta? Very likely he has villages and every kind of property beyond measure⁠—unless he has left it to his friends; for, as I hear, he has no relatives.”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski made no answer. Jendzian knew then that he did not like the question, and began as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>“But God be praised that Pan Zagloba and Pan Volodyovski are well. I thought that the Tartars had caught them. We went through a world of trouble together⁠—But the priest won’t let me talk. Oh, my master, I thought that I should never see them again; for the horde so pressed upon us that there was no help.”</p>
			<p>“Then you were with Pan Volodyovski and Zagloba? They did not tell me anything about that.”</p>
			<p>“For they didn’t know whether I was dead or alive.”</p>
			<p>“And where did the horde press on you so?”</p>
			<p>“Beyond Ploskiri, on the road to Zbaraj. For, my master, we travelled far beyond Yampol⁠—But the priest Tsetsishovski won’t let me talk.”</p>
			<p>A moment of silence.</p>
			<p>“May God reward you for all your good wishes and labors,” said Skshetuski; “for I know why you went there. I was there before you to no purpose.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my master, if only that priest⁠—But this is how it is. ‘I must go with the king to Zbaraj, and do you,’ says he, ‘take care of your master; don’t you tell him anything, for the soul will go out of him.’ ”</p>
			<p>Pan Yan had parted long since from every hope to such a degree that even these words of Jendzian did not rouse in him the least spark. He lay for a time motionless, and then inquired: “Where did you come from to Tsetsishovski and the army?”</p>
			<p>“The wife of the castellan, Pani Vitovska, sent me from Zamost to inform her husband that she would join him at Toporoff. She is a brave lady, my master, and wishes to be with the army, so as not to be away from her husband. I came to Toporoff the day before you. She will be here soon⁠—ought to be here now. But what if he has gone away with the king?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand how you could be in Zamost when you went with Volodyovski and Zagloba beyond Yampol. Why didn’t you come to Zbaraj with them?”</p>
			<p>“You see, my master, the horde pressed us sorely. There was no help. So they two alone resisted a whole chambul, and I fled and never drew bridle till I reached Zamost.”</p>
			<p>“It was happy they were not killed; but I thought you were a better fellow. Was it manly of you to leave them in such straits?”</p>
			<p>“But, my master, if there had been only three of us, I should not have left them, you may be sure; but there were four of us; therefore they threw themselves against the horde, and ordered me to save⁠—if I were sure that joy wouldn’t kill you⁠—for beyond Yampol we found⁠—but since the priest⁠—”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski began to look at the youth, and to open and shut his eyes like a man waking from sleep. Suddenly it seemed as though something had broken within him, for he grew pale, sat up in the bed, and cried with a thundering voice: “Who was with you?”</p>
			<p>“My master, my master!” called the youth, struck with the change that had come on the face of the knight.</p>
			<p>“Who was with you?” cried Skshetuski; and seizing Jendzian by the shoulder, he shook him, began himself to tremble as in a fever, and press the youth in his iron hands.</p>
			<p>“I’ll tell anyhow,” shouted Jendzian, “let the priest do what he likes. The princess was with us, and she is now with Pani Vitovska.”</p>
			<p>Pan Yan grew rigid; he closed his eyes, and his head fell heavily on the pillow.</p>
			<p>“Help!” cried Jendzian. “Surely, my master, you have breathed your last. Help! What have I done? Better I had been silent. Oh, for God’s sake! my master, dearest master, but speak! For God’s sake! the priest was right. My master, my master!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, this is nothing!” said Skshetuski at length. “Where is she?”</p>
			<p>“Praise be to God that you have revived! Better for me to say nothing. She is with Pani Vitovska; you will soon see them here. Praise be to God, my master! only don’t die; you will see them soon. The priest gave her to Pani Vitovska for safe keeping, because there are libertines in the army. Bogun respected her, but misfortune is easily found. I had a world of trouble; but I told the soldiers, ‘She is a relative of Prince Yeremi,’ and they respected her. I had to give away no small money on the road.”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski lay motionless again; but his eyes were open, turned to the ceiling, and his face very serious. It was evident he was praying. When he had finished, he sprang up, sat on the bed, and said: “Give me my clothes, and have the horse saddled.”</p>
			<p>“If you knew, my master, what a plenty of everything there is; for the king before going gave much, and others gave. And there are three splendid horses in the stable⁠—if I only had one like them⁠—but you would better lie and rest a little, for you have no strength yet.”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing the matter with me. I can sit on a horse. In the name of the living God, make haste!”</p>
			<p>“I know that your body is of iron; let it be as you say! But defend me from the priest! Here are your clothes; better cannot be had from the Armenian merchants. You can choose, and I’ll tell them to bring wine, for I told the priest’s servant to heat some.”</p>
			<p>Jendzian occupied himself with the food, and Skshetuski began to put on hastily the clothes presented by the king and others. But from time to time he seized the youth by the shoulders and pressed him to his bosom. Jendzian told him everything from the beginning⁠—how Bogun, stricken down by Volodyovski, but already partly recovered, had met him in Vlodava, and how he had learned of the princess from him, and received the baton; how he had gone subsequently with Volodyovski and Zagloba to Valadinka, and having killed the witch and Cheremís, had taken away the princess; and finally, what peril they were in while fleeing before the forces of Burlai.</p>
			<p>“Pan Zagloba killed Burlai,” interrupted Skshetuski, feverishly.</p>
			<p>“He is a valiant man,” answered Jendzian. “I have never seen his equal; for one is brave, another eloquent, a third cunning, but all these are sitting together in Zagloba. But the worst of all that happened was in those woods behind Ploskiri, when the horde pursued us. Pan Volodyovski with Zagloba remained behind to attract them and stop the pursuit, I rushed off sidewise toward Konstantinoff, leaving Zbaraj; for I thought this way⁠—that after they had killed the little man and Zagloba they would pursue us to Zbaraj. Indeed, I don’t know how the Lord in his mercy rescued the little man and Pan Zagloba. I thought they were cut to pieces. Meanwhile I with the princess slipped through between Hmelnitski, who was marching from Konstantinoff, and Zbaraj, to which the Tartars were marching.”</p>
			<p>“They did not go there, for Pan Kushel stopped them. But hurry!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, if I had known that! But I did not know it; therefore I pressed through with the princess between the Tartars and the Cossacks, as through a defile. Happily the country was empty; nowhere did we meet a living man, neither in the villages nor in the towns, for all had fled, each where he could, before the Tartars. But my soul was sitting on my shoulders from terror, lest that should catch me which I did not escape in the end.”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski stopped dressing and asked: “What was that?”</p>
			<p>“This, my master. I came upon the division of the Cossack Donyéts, brother of that Horpyna with whom the princess was lodged in the ravine. Fortunately I knew him well, for he saw me with Bogun. I brought him a greeting from his sister, showed him Bogun’s baton, and told him all, how Bogun had sent me for the lady, and how he was waiting for me beyond Vlodava. But being Bogun’s friend, he knew that his sister had been guarding the lady. As a matter of course, I thought he would let me go and give me provisions and money for the road; but, said he: ‘Ahead there the general militia is assembling; you’ll fall into the hands of the Poles. Stay with me. We’ll go to Hmelnitski, to his camp; there the girl will be safest of all, for there Hmelnitski himself will take care of her for Bogun.’ When he told me this I thought I should die, for what could I say to it? I said then: ‘Bogun is waiting for me, and my life depends on bringing her at once.’ But he said: ‘We’ll tell Bogun; but don’t you go, for the Poles are on that side.’ Then I began to dispute, and he disputed, till at last he said: ‘It is a wonder to me that you are afraid to go among the Cossacks. Ho! ho! are you not a traitor?’ Then I saw there was no other help but to slip away by night, for he had already begun to suspect me. Seven sweats came out on me, my master. I had prepared everything for the road, when Pan Pelka, from the armies of the king, fell upon us that night.”</p>
			<p>“Pan Pelka?” asked Pan Yan, holding his breath.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my master. A splendid partisan⁠—Pan Pelka, who was killed the other day. May the Lord light his soul! I don’t know whether there is any one who could lead a detachment better and creep up to the enemy better than he, unless Volodyovski alone. Pan Pelka came then, and cut up the detachment of Donyéts so that not a foot got away. They took Donyéts himself prisoner. They drew him on a stake with oxen a couple of weeks ago⁠—served him right! But with Pan Pelka I had trouble not a little, for he was a man desperately intent on the virtue of women⁠—God light his soul! I was afraid that the princess, who had escaped harm from the Cossacks, would be worse treated by her own. But I told Pan Pelka that the lady was a relative of our prince. And I must tell you that he, whenever he mentioned our prince, removed his hat, and was always preparing to enter his service. He respected the princess therefore, and conducted us to Zamost to the king; and there the priest Tsetsishovski⁠—he is a very holy priest, my master⁠—took us in care, and gave the lady to Pani Vitovska, wife of the castellan of Sandomir.”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski drew a deep breath, then threw himself on the neck of Jendzian. “You shall be a friend to me, a brother, not a servant. When was Pani Vitovska to come here?”</p>
			<p>“The week after I left, but it is now ten days. You lay eight days without consciousness.”</p>
			<p>“Let us go, let us go!” exclaimed Skshetuski, “for joy is tearing me to pieces.”</p>
			<p>But before he had finished speaking the tramp of horses was heard outside, and the window was suddenly darkened by horses and men.</p>
			<p>Skshetuski saw through the glass, first the old priest Tsetsishovski, and then the emaciated faces of Zagloba, Volodyovski, Kushel, and other acquaintances among the red dragoons of the prince. A shout of joy was given forth, and in a moment a crowd of knights with the priest at the head of them burst into the room.</p>
			<p>“Peace concluded at Zborovo, the siege raised!” cried the priest.</p>
			<p>But Skshetuski inferred this immediately by the look of his companions of Zbaraj; and at once he was in the embraces of Zagloba and Volodyovski, who disputed for him with each other.</p>
			<p>“They told us that you were alive,” cried Zagloba, “but the joy is the greater that we see you so soon in health. We have come here for you, purposely. Yan, you don’t know with what glory you have covered yourself, and what reward awaits you.”</p>
			<p>“The king has rewarded you,” said the priest, “but the King of Kings has provided something better.”</p>
			<p>“I know already,” said Skshetuski. “May God reward you! Jendzian has told all.”</p>
			<p>“And joy did not kill you? So much the better! Vivat Skshetuski! vivat the princess!” shouted Zagloba. “Well, Yan, we didn’t whisper a word to you about her, for we didn’t know that she was alive. But Jendzian is a cunning rogue; he escaped with her, <i>vulpes astuta!</i> The prince is waiting for you both. Oh, we went for her to Yagorlik. I killed the hellish monster that was guarding her. Those twelve boys got out of your sight, but now you’ll see them, and more. I’ll have grandchildren, gentlemen! Jendzian, tell us if you met great obstacles. Imagine to yourself that I with Pan Michael checked the whole horde. I rushed first on the Tartar regiment. They were trembling before us; nothing could help them. Pan Michael stood up well too. Where is my daughter? Let me see my daughter.”</p>
			<p>“God give you happiness, Yan!” said the little knight, taking Skshetuski again by the shoulders.</p>
			<p>“God reward you for all you have done for me! Words fail me. My life and blood would not suffice to repay,” answered Skshetuski.</p>
			<p>“Enough of this!” cried Zagloba. “Peace is concluded⁠—a fool’s peace, gentlemen, but the position was difficult. It is well that we have left that pestilent Zbaraj. There will be peace now, gentlemen. It is by our labors, especially mine; for if Burlai had been living the negotiations would have come to nothing. We’ll go to the wedding. After that, Yan, keep your eyes open. But you cannot guess what a wedding present the prince has for you! I’ll tell you some other time; but where the hangman is my daughter? Let me have my daughter. Bogun won’t get her this time; first he’ll have to break the rope that binds him. Where is my dearest daughter?”</p>
			<p>“I was just getting into the saddle to meet Pani Vitovska,” said Skshetuski. “Let us go, for I am losing my senses.”</p>
			<p>“Come on, gentlemen! Let us go with him, not to lose time. Come on!”</p>
			<p>“The lady of Sandomir cannot be far distant,” said the priest.</p>
			<p>“To horse!” added Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>But Skshetuski was already outside the door, and sprang on his horse as lightly as if he had not just risen from a bed of sickness. Jendzian kept close to his side, for he preferred not to be alone with the priest. Volodyovski and Zagloba joined them, and they rode as fast as their horses could gallop in advance of all. The whole party of nobles and red dragoons flew along by the Toporoff road like poppy leaves borne by the wind.</p>
			<p>“Come on!” cried Zagloba, beating his horse with his heels.</p>
			<p>And so they flew on about ten furlongs, till at the turn of the highway they saw before them a line of wagons and carriages surrounded by a number of attendants. Seeing armed men in front of them, some of these hurried with all speed to inquire who they were.</p>
			<p>“Ours, from the king’s army!” cried Zagloba. “And who is coming there?”</p>
			<p>“The lady of Sandomir,” was the answer. Such emotion seized Skshetuski that not knowing what he did, he slipped from the horse and stood tottering at the roadside. He removed his cap, his temples were covered with drops of perspiration, and he trembled in every limb in presence of his happiness. Pan Michael sprang also from the saddle, and caught his enfeebled friend by the shoulder.</p>
			<p>Behind them all the others formed with uncovered heads at the side of the highway. Meanwhile the line of wagons and carriages had come up and begun to pass by. In company with Pani Vitovska were travelling a number of other ladies, who looked with astonishment, not understanding what this military procession at the roadside could mean.</p>
			<p>At last, in the centre of the retinue, appeared a carriage richer than the rest. The eyes of the knights beheld through its open windows the dignified countenance of the gray-haired lady, and at her side the sweet and beautiful face of the princess.</p>
			<p>“Daughter!” roared Zagloba, rushing straight to the carriage, “daughter! Skshetuski is with us, my daughter!”</p>
			<p>They began to cry, “Stop! stop!” along the line. Hurry and confusion followed; then Kushel and Volodyovski conducted or rather drew Skshetuski to the carriage; he had weakened altogether, and became heavier every moment in their hands. His head hung upon his breast; he could walk no farther, and fell on his knees at the steps of the carriage.</p>
			<p>But a moment later the strong and beautiful arms of the princess held his weakened and emaciated head.</p>
			<p>Zagloba, seeing the astonishment of the lady of Sandomir, cried: “This is Skshetuski, the hero of Zbaraj. He worked through the enemy; he saved the army, the prince, the whole Commonwealth. May God bless them, and long may they live!”</p>
			<p>“Long may they live! Vivant! vivant!” cried the nobles.</p>
			<p>“Long may they live! Long may they live!” repeated the Vishnyevetski dragoons, till the thunder of their voices was heard over the fields of Toporoff.</p>
			<p>“To Tarnopol, to the prince, to the wedding!” cried Zagloba. “Well, daughter, your sorrows are over, and for Bogun the executioner and the sword.”</p>
			<p>The priest Tsetsishovski had his eyes raised to heaven, and his lips repeated the wonderful words: “They sowed in tears, and reaped in joy.”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski was seated in the carriage at the side of the princess, and the retinue moved on. The day was wonderfully bright; the oak-groves and the fields were floating in sunlight. Low down on the fallow land, and higher above them, and still higher in the blue air drifted here and there silver threads of spider-web, which in the later autumn cover the fields in those parts as if with snow. And there was great stillness all around; but the horses snorted distinctly in the retinue.</p>
			<p>“Pan Michael,” said Zagloba, knocking his stirrup against that of Volodyovski, “something has caught me by the throat, and holds me as in that hour when Pan Longin⁠—eternal rest to him!⁠—went out from Zbaraj. But when I think that these two have found each other at last, it is as light in my heart as if I had drunk a quart at a draught. If the accident of marriage does not strike you, in old age we’ll nurse their children. Every one is born for something special, Pan Michael, and both of us it seems are better for war than wedlock.”</p>
			<p>The little knight made no answer, but began to move his mustaches more vigorously than usual.</p>
			<p>They were going to Toporoff and thence to Tarnopol, where they were to join Prince Yeremi, and thence with his troops to the wedding at Lvoff. On the way Zagloba told the lady of Sandomir what had happened recently. She learned therefore that the king, after a murderous, indecisive battle, had concluded a treaty with the Khan, not over favorable, but securing peace to the Commonwealth, for some time at least. Hmelnitski in virtue of the treaty remained hetman, and had the right to select for himself forty thousand registered Cossacks, for which concession he swore loyalty and obedience to the king and the estates.</p>
			<p>“It is an undoubted fact,” said Zagloba, “that it will come to war again with Hmelnitski; but if only the baton does not pass by our prince, all will go differently.”</p>
			<p>“Tell Skshetuski the most important thing,” said Volodyovski, urging his horse nearer.</p>
			<p>“True,” answered Zagloba, “I wanted to begin with that, but I couldn’t catch my breath till now. You know nothing, Yan, of what has happened since you came out⁠—that Bogun is a captive of the prince.”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski and the princess were astonished at this unexpected news to such a degree that they could not speak a word. Helena merely raised her hands, a moment of silence followed; then she asked: “How? In what manner?”</p>
			<p>“The finger of God is there,” answered Zagloba⁠—“nothing else but the finger of God. The negotiations were concluded, and we were just marching out of that pestilent Zbaraj. The prince hurried with the cavalry to the left wing to watch lest the horde should attack the army, for frequently they do not observe treaties; when suddenly a leader with three hundred horse rushed upon the cavalry of the prince.”</p>
			<p>“Only Bogun could do such a thing,” said Skshetuski.</p>
			<p>“It was he too. But it is not for Cossacks to fall upon soldiers of Zbaraj. Pan Michael surrounded and cut them to pieces; and Bogun, wounded by him a second time, went into captivity. He has no luck with Pan Michael, and he must be convinced of it now, since that was the third time he tried him; but he was only looking for death.”</p>
			<p>“It appeared,” added Volodyovski, “that Bogun wished to reach Zbaraj from Valadinka; but the road was a long one. He failed; and when he learned that peace was concluded, his mind was confused from rage, and he cared for nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Who draws the sword will perish by the sword, for such is the fickleness of fortune,” said Zagloba. “He is a mad Cossack, and the madder since he is desperate. A terrible uproar arose on his account between us and ruffiandom. We thought that it would come to war again, for the prince cried first of all that they had broken the treaty. Hmelnitski wanted to save Bogun; but the Khan was enraged at him, for, said he, ‘he has exposed my word and my oath to contempt.’ The Khan threatened Hmelnitski with war, and sent a messenger to the king with notice that Bogun was a private robber, and with a request that the prince would not hesitate, but treat Bogun as a bandit. It is probable too that it was important for the Khan to get the captives away in quiet. Of these the Tartars have taken so many that it will be possible to buy a man in Stamboul for two hob-nails.”</p>
			<p>“What did the prince do with Bogun?” inquired Skshetuski, unquietly.</p>
			<p>“The prince was about to give orders to shave a stake for him at once, but he changed his mind and said: ‘I’ll give him to Skshetuski; let him do what he likes with him.’ Now the Cossack is in Tarnopol under ground; the barber is taking care of his head. My God, how many times the soul tried to go out of that man! Never have dogs torn the skin of any wolf as we have his. Pan Michael alone bit him three times. But he is a solid piece; though, to tell the truth, an unhappy man. But let the hangman light him! I have no longer any ill-feeling against him, except that he threatened me terribly and without cause; for I drank with him, associated with him as with an equal, till he raised his hand against you, my daughter. I might have finished him at Rozlogi. But I know of old that there is no thankfulness in the world, and there are few who give good for good. Let him⁠—” Here Zagloba began to nod his head. “And what will you do with him, Yan?” asked he. “The soldiers say you will make an outrider of him, for he is a showy fellow; but I cannot believe you would do that.”</p>
			<p>“Surely I shall not. He is a soldier of eminent daring, and because he is unhappy is another reason that I should not disgrace him with any servile function.”</p>
			<p>“May God forgive him everything!” said the princess.</p>
			<p>“Amen!” answered Zagloba. “He prays to Death, as to a mother, to take him, and he surely would have found it if he had not been late at Zbaraj.”</p>
			<p>All grew silent, meditating on the marvellous changes of fortune, till in the distance appeared Grabovo, where they stopped for their first refreshments. They found there a crowd of soldiers returning from Zborovo; Vitovski, the castellan of Sandomir, who was going with his regiment to meet his wife, and Marek Sobieski, with Pshiyemski and many nobles of the general militia who were returning home by that road. The castle at Grabovo had been burned, as well as all the other buildings; but as the day was wonderful⁠—warm and calm⁠—without seeking shelter for their heads, all disposed themselves in the oak-grove under the open sky. Large supplies of food and drink were brought, and the servants immediately set about preparing the evening meal. Pan Vitovski had tents pitched in the oak grove for the ladies and the dignitaries⁠—a real camp, as it were. The knights collected before the tents, wishing to see the princess and Pan Yan. Others spoke of the past war; those who had not been at Zbaraj asked the soldiers of the prince for the details of the siege; and it was noisy and joyous, especially since God had given so beautiful a day.</p>
			<p>Zagloba, telling for the thousandth time how he had killed Burlai, took the lead among the nobles; Jendzian, among the servants who were preparing the meal. But the adroit young fellow seized the fitting moment, and drawing Skshetuski a little aside, bent obediently to his feet. “My master,” said he, “I should like to beg a favor.”</p>
			<p>“It would be difficult for me to refuse you anything,” answered Skshetuski, “since through you everything that is best has come to pass.”</p>
			<p>“I thought at once,” said the youth, “that you were preparing some reward for me.”</p>
			<p>“Tell me what you want.”</p>
			<p>Jendzian’s ruddy face grew dark, and from his eyes shot hatred and stubbornness. “One favor I ask⁠—nothing more do I want. Give me Bogun, my master.”</p>
			<p>“Bogun!” said Skshetuski, with astonishment. “What do you want to do with him?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my master, I’ll think of that. I’ll see that my own is not lost, and that he shall pay me with interest for having put me to shame in Chigirin. I know surely that you will have him put out of the way. Let me pay him first.”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski’s brows contracted. “Impossible!” said he, with decision.</p>
			<p>“Oh, for God’s sake! I’d rather die,” cried Jendzian, piteously. “To think that I have lived for disgrace to fasten to me.”</p>
			<p>“Ask what you like, I’ll refuse you nothing; but this cannot be. Ask your grandfather if it is not more sinful to keep such a promise than to abandon it. Do not touch God’s punishing hand with your own, lest you suffer. Be ashamed, Jendzian! This man as it is prays to God for death; and besides he is wounded and in bonds. What do you want to be to him⁠—an executioner? Do you want to put shame on a man in bonds, to kill a wounded man? Are you a Tartar or a Cossack man-slayer? While I live I will not permit this, and do not mention it to me!”</p>
			<p>In the voice of Pan Yan there was so much power and will that the youth lost every hope at once; therefore he added with a tearful voice: “When he is well he could manage two like me, and when he is sick it is not becoming to take vengeance. When shall I pay him for what I have suffered?”</p>
			<p>“Leave vengeance to God,” said Pan Yan.</p>
			<p>The youth opened his mouth. He wished to say something more, inquire about something; but Pan Yan turned away and went to the tents, before which a large assembly had collected. In the centre sat Pani Vitovska, at her side the princess, around them the knights. In front of them stood Zagloba, cap in hand. He was telling those who had been only at Zborovo of the siege of Zbaraj. All listened to him with breathless attention; their faces moved with emotion, and those who had not taken part in the siege regretted that they had not been there. Pan Yan sat near the princess, and taking her hand, pressed it to his lips: then they leaned one against the other and sat quietly. The sun was already leaving the sky, and evening was gradually coming. Skshetuski was lost in attention, as if hearing something new for himself. Zagloba wiped his brows, and his voice sounded louder and louder. Fresh memory or imagination brought before the eyes of the knights those bloody deeds. They saw therefore the ramparts as if surrounded by a sea, and the raging assaults; they heard the tumult and the howling, the roar of cannon and musketry; they saw the prince, in silver armor, standing on the ramparts, amidst the hail of bullets; then suffering, famine; those red nights in which death circled like a great ill-omened bird over the intrenchments; the departure of Podbipienta, of Skshetuski. All listened, sometimes raising their eyes to heaven or grasping their swords, and Zagloba finished thus:⁠—</p>
			<p>“It is now one tomb, one mighty mound; and if beneath it are not now lying the glory of the Commonwealth, the flower of its knighthood, the prince voevoda, I, and all of us, whom the Cossacks themselves call the lions of Zbaraj, it is owing to him!” And he pointed to Skshetuski.</p>
			<p>“True as life!” cried Marek Sobieski and Pan Pshiyemski.</p>
			<p>“Glory to him⁠—honor, thanks!” strong voices began to cry. “Vivat Skshetuski! vivat the young couple! Long life to the hero!” was cried louder and louder.</p>
			<p>Enthusiasm seized all present. Some ran for the goblets; others threw their caps in the air. The soldiers began to rattle their sabres, and soon was heard one general shout: “Glory! glory! Long life!”</p>
			<p>Skshetuski, like a true Christian knight, dropped his head obediently; but the princess rose, shook her tresses, a glow came in her face, her eyes were gleaming with pride⁠—for this knight was to be her husband, and the glory of the husband falls on the wife like the light of the sun on the earth.</p>
			<br/>
			<p>Late at night the assembly parted, going in two directions. Vitovski, Pshiyemski, and Sobieski marched with their regiments toward Toporoff; but Skshetuski, with the princess and the squadron of Volodyovski, to Tarnopol. The night was clear as day. Myriads of stars shone in the sky; the moon rose and illuminated the fields covered with spider-webs. The soldiers began to sing. Then white mists rose from the meadows and turned the land as it were into one gigantic lake, shining in the light of the moon.</p>
			<p>On such a night Skshetuski once went forth from Zbaraj, and on such a night now he felt the heart of Kurtsevichovna beating near his own.</p>
			<br/>
			<br/>
			<br/>
			<br/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
