<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XL</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XL</h2>
			<p>Zagloba lay bound hand and foot to his own sabre, which was passed across behind his knees, in that same room in which the wedding was celebrated. The terrible chief sat at some distance on a bench, and feasted his eyes on the terror of the prisoner.</p>
			<p>“Good evening!” said he, seeing the open lids of his victim.</p>
			<p>Zagloba made no answer, but in one twinkle of an eye came to his senses as if he had never put a drop of wine to his mouth; the ants which had gone down to his heels returned to his head, and the marrow in his bones grew cold as ice. They say that a drowning man in the last moment sees clearly all his past⁠—that he remembers everything, and gives himself an account of that which is happening to him. Such clearness of vision and memory Zagloba possessed in that hour; and the last expression of that clearness was a silent cry, unspoken by the lips⁠—</p>
			<p>“He will give me a flaying now.”</p>
			<p>And the leader repeated, with a quiet voice: “Good evening!”</p>
			<p>“Brr!” thought Zagloba, “I would rather go to the furies.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you know me, lord noble?”</p>
			<p>“With the forehead, with the forehead! How is your health?”</p>
			<p>“Not bad; but as to yours, I’ll occupy myself with that.”</p>
			<p>“I have not asked God for such a doctor, and I doubt if I could digest your medicine; but the will of God be done.”</p>
			<p>“Well, you cured me; now I’ll return thanks. We are old friends. You remember how you bound my head in Rozlogi, do you not?”</p>
			<p>Bogun’s eyes began to glitter like two carbuncles, and the line of his mustaches extended in a terrible smile.</p>
			<p>“I remember,” said Zagloba, “that I might have stabbed you, and I did not.”</p>
			<p>“But have I stabbed you, or do I think to stab you? No! For me you are a darling, a dear; and I will guard you as the eye in my head.”</p>
			<p>“I have always said that you are an honorable cavalier,” said Zagloba, pretending to take Bogun’s words in earnest. At the same time through his mind flew the thought: “It is evident that he is meditating some special delicacy for me. I shall not die in simple style.”</p>
			<p>“You speak well,” continued Bogun. “You too are an honorable cavalier; so we have sought and found each other.”</p>
			<p>“What is true is that I have not sought you; but I thank you for the good word.”</p>
			<p>“You will thank me still more before long; and I will thank you for this, that you took the young woman from Rozlogi to Bar. There I found her; and I would ask you to the wedding, but it will not be today nor tomorrow⁠—there is war at present⁠—and you are an old man, perhaps you will not live to see it.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba, notwithstanding the terrible position in which he found himself, pricked up his ears. “To the wedding!” he muttered.</p>
			<p>“But what did you think?” asked Bogun. “That I was a peasant, to constrain her without a priest, or not to insist on being married in Kiev. You brought her to Bar not for a peasant, but for an ataman and a hetman.”</p>
			<p>“Very good!” thought Zagloba. Then he turned his head to Bogun. “Give the order to unbind me,” said he.</p>
			<p>“Oh, lie awhile, lie awhile! You will go on a journey. You are an old man, and you need rest before the road.”</p>
			<p>“Where do you wish to take me?”</p>
			<p>“You are my friend, so I will take you to my other friend, Krívonos. Then we shall both think how to make it pleasant for you.”</p>
			<p>“It will be hot for me,” muttered Zagloba; and again the ants were walking over his back. At last he began to speak:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I know that you are enraged at me; but unjustly, God knows. We lived together, and in Chigirin we drank more than one bottle. I had for you the love of a father for your knightly daring; a better love you did not find in the whole Ukraine. Isn’t that true? In what way have I crossed your path? If I had not gone with you to Rozlogi, we should have lived to this day in kind friendship; and why did I go if not out of friendship for you? And if you had not become enraged, if you had not killed those unhappy people⁠—God is looking at me⁠—I should not have crossed your path. Why should I mix in other men’s affairs? I would have preferred to see the girl yours; but through your Tartar courtship my conscience was moved, and besides it was a noble’s house. You yourself would not have acted otherwise. I might, moreover, have swept you out of the world with the greatest gain to myself. And why did I not do it? Because I am a noble. Be ashamed of yourself too, for I know you wish to take vengeance on me. As it is, you have the girl in your hands. What do you want of me? Have not I guarded as the eye in my head this your property? Since you have respected her it is to be seen that you have knightly honor and conscience; but how will you extend to her the hand which you steep in my innocent blood? How will you say to her, ‘The man who led you through the mob and the Tartars I delivered to torment’? Have shame, and let me go from these bonds and from this captivity into which you have seized me by treachery. You are young, and know not what may meet you, and for my death God will punish you in that which is dearest to you.”</p>
			<p>Bogun rose from the bench, pale with rage, and approaching Zagloba, began to speak in a voice stifled with fury⁠—</p>
			<p>“Unclean swine! I will have straps torn from you, I’ll burn you on a slow fire, I’ll drive spikes into you, I’ll tear you into rags.”</p>
			<p>In an access of fury he grasped at the knife hanging from his belt, and for a moment pressed it convulsively in his hand. The edge was already gleaming in Zagloba’s eyes, when the chief restrained himself, thrust the knife back into the scabbard, and cried: “Boys!”</p>
			<p>Six Zaporojians came into the room.</p>
			<p>“Take that Polish carrion, throw it into the stable, and guard it as the eye in your head!”</p>
			<p>The Cossacks took Zagloba⁠—two by his hands and feet, one behind by the hair⁠—and carrying him out of the house bore him through the yard, and threw him on a dung-heap in the stable standing at one side. Then they closed the door. Complete darkness surrounded the prisoner, but in the cracks between the wall-planks and through holes in the thatch the dim light of night penetrated here and there. After a while Zagloba’s eyes grew accustomed to the darkness. He looked around, and saw there were no pigs in the stable, nor Cossacks. The conversation of the latter, however, reached him clearly through all the four walls. Evidently the whole building was surrounded closely; but in spite of these guards Zagloba drew a long breath.</p>
			<p>First of all, he was alive. When Bogun flashed his knife above him he was convinced that his last moment had come, and he recommended his soul to God⁠—it is true with the greatest fear. But evidently Bogun decided to save him for a death incomparably more complicated. He desired not only to take revenge, but to glut himself with vengeance on the man who had stolen from him the beauty, belittled his Cossack glory, and covered him with ridicule, swaddling him like a baby. It was therefore a gloomy prospect for Pan Zagloba; but he was comforted by the thought that he was still living, that likely they would take him to Krívonos and begin to torture him there, and consequently he had a few, perhaps a number of days before him. In the mean while he lay in the stable alone, and could in the midst of the quiet night think of stratagems.</p>
			<p>That was the one good side of the affair; but when he thought of the bad ones the ants began to travel over his spine in thousands.</p>
			<p>“Stratagems! If a pig lay here in this stable, he would have more stratagems than I, for they would not tie him crosswise to a sabre. If Solomon had been bound in this way, he would have been no wiser than his trousers or my boot-heel. Oh, my God, my God, for what dost thou punish me? Of all people in the world I wanted most to avoid this scoundrel, and such is my luck that he is just the man I have not avoided. I shall have my skin dressed like sviboda cloth. If another had taken me, I might promise to join the rebellion and then run away. But another would not have believed me, and this one least of all. I feel my heart dying within me. The devils have brought me to this place. Oh, my God! my God!”</p>
			<p>But after a while Zagloba thought that if he had his hands and feet free, he might more easily use some stratagem. Well, let him try! If he could only push the sword from under his knees, the rest would go on more easily. But how was he to push it out? He turned on his side, he could do nothing; then he fell into deep thought.</p>
			<p>Next he began to rock himself on his back with increasing rapidity, each moment pushing himself half the length of his body ahead. He got heated; his forehead was in greater perspiration than during the dance. At times he stopped and rested; at times he interrupted the work, for it appeared some one of the Cossacks was coming to the door; then he began with renewed ardor. At last he pushed himself forward to the wall.</p>
			<p>After that he began to sway in another direction, not from head to foot, but from side to side, so that every time he struck lightly against the wall with the sabre, which was pushed in this way from under his knees, moving more and more toward the middle of the stable from the side of the hilt. Zagloba’s heart began to beat like a hammer, for he saw that this method might be effectual.</p>
			<p>He worked on, trying to strike with the least noise, and only when the conversation of the Cossacks was louder than the light blow. At last the moment came when the end of the sheath was on a line with his wrist and his knee, and further striking against the wall could not push it out. But hanging from the other side was a considerable and much heavier part of the sabre, taking into consideration the hilt with the cross usually on sabres. Zagloba counted on that cross.</p>
			<p>He began to rock himself for the third time, but now the great object of his efforts was to turn himself with his feet toward the wall. Attaining this, he began to push himself up with his feet. The sabre still clung under his knees and his hands, but the hilt became more and more involved in the uneven surface of the ground. At length the cross caught rather firmly. Zagloba pushed the last time. For a moment joy nailed him to the spot; the sabre had dropped out.</p>
			<p>He removed his hands then from his knees, and though they were still bound he caught the sabre with them. He held the scabbard with his feet and drew out the blade. To cut the bonds on his feet was the work of a moment. It was more difficult in the case of his hands. He was obliged to put his sabre on the ground with the edge up, and draw the cords along the edge until he had cut them. When he had done this he was not only free from bonds, but armed. He drew a long breath, then made a sign of the cross and began to thank God.</p>
			<p>But it was very far yet from the cutting of the bonds to the rescuing of himself from the hands of Bogun.</p>
			<p>“What further?” asked Zagloba of himself.</p>
			<p>He found no answer. The stable was surrounded by Cossacks; there were about a hundred. A mouse could not have passed through unobserved, and what could a man as bulky as Zagloba do?</p>
			<p>“I see that I am beginning to come to the end of my resources,” said he to himself. “My wit is only good to grease boots with, and you could buy better grease than it from the Hungarians at the fair. If God does not send me some idea, then I shall become roast meat for the crows; but if he does send me an idea, then I promise to remain in continence like Pan Longin.”</p>
			<p>The louder conversation of the Cossacks behind the wall interrupted his thoughts. He sprang up and put his ear to a crack between the timbers. The dry pine gave back the voices like the sounding-board of a lute.</p>
			<p>“And where shall we go from here, Father Ovsivuyu?” asked one voice.</p>
			<p>“To Kamenyets, of course,” said another.</p>
			<p>“Nonsense! The horses can barely drag their legs; they will not get there.”</p>
			<p>“That’s why we stop here; they will have rest by morning.”</p>
			<p>A moment of silence followed; then the first voice was heard lower than before. “And it seems to me, father, that the ataman is going from Kamenyets to Yampol.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba held his breath.</p>
			<p>“Be silent if your young head is dear to you!” was the answer.</p>
			<p>Another moment of silence, but from behind the other walls came whispering.</p>
			<p>“They are all around, on the watch everywhere,” muttered Zagloba; and he went to the opposite wall. Meanwhile were heard the noise of chewing oats and the snorting of horses evidently standing right there; among these horses the Cossacks were lying on the ground and talking, for their voices came from below.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said one, “we have come here without sleeping, eating, or feeding our horses, so as to go on the stake in the camp of Yeremi.”</p>
			<p>“The people who have fled from Yarmolintsi saw him as I see you. What they tell is a terror. He is as big as a pine-tree; in his forehead are two firebrands, and he has a dragon under him for a horse.”</p>
			<p>“Lord, have mercy on us!”</p>
			<p>“We ought to take that Pole with the soldiers and be off.”</p>
			<p>“How be off, when as it is the horses are just dying?”</p>
			<p>“A bad fix, brother! If I were the ataman, I would cut off the heads of those Poles, and go back to Kamenyets, even on foot.”</p>
			<p>“We will take him with us to Kamenyets, and there our ataman will play with him.”</p>
			<p>“The devils will play with you first!” muttered Zagloba.</p>
			<p>And, indeed, in spite of all his fear of Bogun, and maybe especially because of that, he had sworn that he would not yield himself alive. He was free from bonds, and he had a sabre in his hands⁠—he would defend himself. If they cut him to pieces, all right; but they wouldn’t take him alive.</p>
			<p>The snorting and groaning of horses excessively road-weary drowned the sound of further conversation, and immediately gave a certain idea to Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“If I could get through the wall,” thought he, “and jump on horseback suddenly⁠—it is night, and before they could see what happened I should be out of sight. It is hard enough to chase through the ravines and valleys by sunlight, but what must it be in the dark? God grant me an opportunity!”</p>
			<p>But an opportunity was not to be obtained easily. It was necessary either to throw down the wall⁠—and to do that he would have to be Pan Podbipienta⁠—or to burrow under it like a fox; and then they would surely hear, discover, and seize the fugitive by the neck before he could touch the stirrup with his foot. A thousand stratagems crowded into Zagloba’s head; but for the very reason that they were a thousand no one of them presented itself clearly.</p>
			<p>“It cannot be otherwise; only with my life can I pay,” thought he.</p>
			<p>Then he went toward the third wall. All at once he struck his head against something hard. He felt; it was a ladder. The stable was not for pigs, but for buffaloes, and half the length it had a loft for straw and hay. Zagloba without a moment’s hesitation climbed up. Then he sat down, drew breath, and began slowly to pull up the ladder after him.</p>
			<p>“Well, now I am in a fortress!” he muttered. “Even if they should find another ladder, they couldn’t bring it here very quickly; and if I don’t split the forehead of the man who comes here, then I’ll give myself to be smoked into bacon. Oh, devil take it!” he burst out after a while, “in truth they cannot only smoke me, but fry and melt me into tallow. But let them burn the stable if they wish⁠—all right! They won’t get me alive; and it is all the same whether the crows eat me raw or roasted. If I only escape those robber hands, I don’t care for the rest; and I have hope that something will happen yet.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba passed easily, it is evident, from the lowest despair to hope⁠—in fact, such hope entered him as if he were already in the camp of Prince Yeremi. But still his position had not improved much. He was sitting on the loft, and he had a sabre in his hand; he might ward off an attack for some time, but that was all. From the loft to freedom was a road like jumping from the stove on your forehead⁠—with this difference, that below the sabres and pikes of the Cossacks watching around the walls were waiting for him.</p>
			<p>“Something will happen!” muttered Zagloba; and approaching the roof he began to separate quietly and remove the thatch, so as to gain for himself an outlook into the world. This was easily done, for the Cossacks talked continually under the walls, wishing to kill the tedium of watching; and besides there sprang up a rather strong breeze, which deadened with its movement among the neighboring trees the noise which was made in removing the bundles. After a time the aperture was ready. Zagloba stuck his head through it and began to look around.</p>
			<p>The night had already begun to wane, and on the eastern horizon appeared the first glimmer of day. By the pale light Zagloba saw the whole yard filled with horses; in front of the cottage rows of sleeping Cossacks, stretched out like long indefinite lines; farther on the well-sweep and the trough, in which water was glistening; and near it again a rank of sleeping men and a number of Cossacks with drawn sabres in their hands walking along that line.</p>
			<p>“There are my men, bound with ropes,” muttered Zagloba. “Bah!” he added after a while, “if they were mine! But they are the prince’s. I was a good leader to them; there is nothing to be said on that point. I led them into the mouth of the dog. It will be a shame to show my eyes if God returns me freedom. And through what was all this? Through lovemaking and drinking. What was it to me that trash were marrying? I had as much business at this wedding as at a dog’s wedding. I will renounce this traitorous mead, which crawls into the legs, not the head. All the evil in the world is from drinking; for if they had fallen upon us while sober, I should have gained the victory in a trice and shut Bogun up in this stable.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba’s gaze fell again on the cottage in which the chief was sleeping, and rested at its door.</p>
			<p>“Sleep on, you scoundrel!” he muttered, “sleep! And may you dream that the devils are skinning you⁠—a thing which will not miss you in any case! You wanted to make a sieve out of my skin; try to crawl up to me here, and we shall see if I do not cut yours so that it wouldn’t do to make boots for a dog. If I could only get myself out of this place⁠—if I could only get out! But how?”</p>
			<p>Indeed the problem was not to be solved. The whole yard was so packed with men and horses that even if Zagloba had got out of the stable, even if he had pushed through the thatch and sprung on one of the horses that stood right there, he could in no wise have pushed to the gate; and then how was he to get beyond the gate? Still, it seemed to him that he had solved more than half the problem. He was free, armed, and he sat in the loft as in a fortress.</p>
			<p>“What the devil good is there,” thought he, “in getting out of the rope if you are to be hanged with it afterward?” And again stratagems began to bustle in his head; but there were so many of them that he could not choose.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the light increased, the places around the cottage began to emerge from the shadow; the thatch of the cottage was covered as if by silver. Zagloba could distinguish accurately particular groups; he could see the red uniforms of his men, who were lying around the well, and the sheepskin coats under which the Cossacks were sleeping near the cottage.</p>
			<p>Then suddenly some figure rose from the rank of the sleepers and began to pass with slow step through the yard, halting here and there near men and horses, speaking for a moment with the Cossacks who were guarding the prisoners, and at last approached the stable. Zagloba supposed at first that it was Bogun, for he saw that the guards spoke to that figure as subordinates to a superior.</p>
			<p>“Eh!” he muttered, “if I had a musket now, I would show you how to cover yourself with your feet.”</p>
			<p>At this moment the figure raised its head, and on its face fell the gray light of the morning. It was not Bogun, but the sotnik Golody, whom Zagloba recognized at once, for he knew Golody well from the time of his own intimacy with Bogun in Chigirin.</p>
			<p>“Well, boys, you are not asleep?” said Golody.</p>
			<p>“No, father, though we should like to sleep. It is about time to change guard.”</p>
			<p>“It will be changed immediately. And that devil’s imp has not got away?”</p>
			<p>“No, no!⁠—unless the soul has gone out of him, father, for he hasn’t moved.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! he is an old fox. But look, see what he is doing, for he would go through the ground.”</p>
			<p>“This minute!” answered a number of Cossacks, going to the door of the stable.</p>
			<p>“Throw out hay from the mow! Rub the horses! We will start at sunrise.”</p>
			<p>“All right, father!”</p>
			<p>Zagloba, leaving at once his lookout in the opening of the thatch, crawled to the hole in the floor. At the same moment he heard the creak of the wooden hinges and the rustling of the straw under the feet of the Cossacks. His heart beat like a hammer in his breast, and he pressed the hilt of the sabre in his hand, renewing in his soul the oath that he would resign himself to be burned with the stable or be cut to pieces rather than be taken alive. He expected every moment that the Cossacks would raise a fearful uproar, but he was deceived. For a time he heard them walking more and more quickly through the whole stable. At last one said⁠—</p>
			<p>“What the devil is the matter? I can’t find him. We threw him in here.”</p>
			<p>“He isn’t a werewolf, is he? Strike a light, Vassily; it is as dark here as in a forest.”</p>
			<p>A moment of silence followed. Evidently Vassily was looking for flint and tinder, while the other Cossacks began to call in a low voice: “Where are you?”</p>
			<p>“Kiss the dog’s ear!” muttered Zagloba.</p>
			<p>Steel struck flint, a cluster of sparks flashed forth and lighted the dark interior of the stable and the heads of the Cossacks in their caps, then deeper darkness came down again.</p>
			<p>“He is not here! he is not here!” cried excited voices.</p>
			<p>That moment one sprang to the door. “Father Golody! Father Golody!”</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter?” cried the sotnik, approaching the door.</p>
			<p>“There is no Pole.”</p>
			<p>“How, no Pole?”</p>
			<p>“He has gone into the ground; he isn’t anywhere. O God, have mercy on us! We struck fire; he is not here.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible! Oh, you will catch it from the ataman! Has he escaped, or how is it? You have been asleep.”</p>
			<p>“No, father, we have not slept. He didn’t get out of the stable on our side.”</p>
			<p>“Be quiet! don’t wake the ataman. If he hasn’t gone out, then he must be here. Have you looked everywhere?”</p>
			<p>“Everywhere.”</p>
			<p>“On the loft too?”</p>
			<p>“How could he crawl on the loft when he was bound?”</p>
			<p>“You fool! If he hadn’t unbound himself, he would be here. Look on the loft! Strike a light!”</p>
			<p>Sparks flashed again. The news flew in a moment among all the guards. They began to crowd to the stable with the haste usual on sudden occasions; hurried steps were heard, hurried questions and still more hurried answers. Advices crossed one another like swords in battle.</p>
			<p>“To the loft! to the loft!”</p>
			<p>“But watch outside!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t wake the ataman; if you do, there will be terror.”</p>
			<p>“The ladder is gone!”</p>
			<p>“Bring another!”</p>
			<p>“There is none anywhere.”</p>
			<p>“Run to the cottage; see if there is one there.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, curse the Pole!”</p>
			<p>“Go up the corners to the thatch; get in through the thatch.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible; for the roof projects and is fastened with planks.”</p>
			<p>“Bring the lances; we will go up on the lances. Ah, the dog! he has hauled up the ladder.”</p>
			<p>“Bring the lances!” roared Golody.</p>
			<p>Some ran for the lances, while others stretched their heads up toward the loft. Already scattered light penetrated through the open door into the stable; and with its uncertain gleam was to be seen the square opening in the loft, black and silent. From below were heard single voices.</p>
			<p>“Now, sir noble, let down the ladder and come. You won’t get away, anyhow; why put people to trouble? Come down, oh, come down!”</p>
			<p>Silence.</p>
			<p>“You are a wise man. If it would do you any good, you might stay up there; but since it won’t help you, come down of your own accord, be a good fellow.”</p>
			<p>Silence.</p>
			<p>“Come down! If you don’t, we will skin your head and throw you headfirst into the dung-heap.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba was as deaf to threats as to coaxing, sitting in the dark like a badger in his hole, preparing for a stubborn defence. He only grasped his sabre tighter, panted a little, and whispered his prayers.</p>
			<p>Lances were now brought, three of them tied together, and placed with their points to the opening. The thought flashed through Zagloba’s mind to grasp and draw them up; but he thought that the roof might be too low, and he couldn’t draw them up entirely. Besides, others would be brought at once. Meanwhile the stable became crowded with Cossacks. Some held torches, others brought from wagons all kinds of ladders and poles, every one of which turned out to be too short; these they lashed together hurriedly with straps, for it was really difficult to climb on the lances. Still they found volunteers.</p>
			<p>“I’ll go,” called a number of voices.</p>
			<p>“Wait for the ladder!” said Golody.</p>
			<p>“And what harm is it, father, to try on the lances?”</p>
			<p>“Vassily will climb; he goes like a cat.”</p>
			<p>“Let him try.”</p>
			<p>But others began to joke immediately. “Be careful! he has a sabre; he will cut your head off. Look out! he will grab you by the head, drag you in, and treat you as a bear would.”</p>
			<p>But Vassily didn’t allow himself to be frightened. “He knows,” said Vassily, “that if he should lay a finger on me the ataman would give him the devil to eat; and you, brothers.”</p>
			<p>This was a warning to Zagloba, who sat quietly, and did not even mutter.</p>
			<p>But the Cossacks, as is usual among soldiers, got into good humor, for the whole affair began to amuse them; so they kept on teasing Vassily.</p>
			<p>“There will be one blockhead less in the white world.”</p>
			<p>“He won’t think how we shall pay him for your head. He is a bold hero.”</p>
			<p>“Ho, ho! He is a werewolf. The devil knows into what form he has turned already. He is a wizard! Can’t tell, Vassily, whom you will find there behind the opening.”</p>
			<p>Vassily, who had already spat on his palms and was just grasping the lances by the stem, stopped suddenly. “I’ll go against a Pole,” said he, “but not against the devil.”</p>
			<p>But now the ladders were lashed together and placed at the opening. It was difficult to climb them, too, for they bent immediately where they were tied, and the slender round cracked under the feet, which were placed on the lowest one to try. But Golody himself began to ascend; while going, he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“My dear noble, you see that there is no joking here. If you have made up your mind to stay up there, stay; but don’t fight, for we will get you anyhow, even if we have to pull the stable to pieces. Have sense!”</p>
			<p>At last his head reached the opening and went through it slowly. All at once the whiz of a sabre was heard. The Cossack screamed fearfully, tottered, and fell, with his head cut in two.</p>
			<p>“Cut! slash!” roared the Cossacks.</p>
			<p>A fearful tumult began in the stable. Shouts and cries were raised, which were overborne by the thundering voice of Zagloba⁠—</p>
			<p>“Oh, you scoundrels, you man-eaters, you basilisks! I’ll cut you to pieces, you mangy ruffians! You’ll know a knightly hand. Attacking honest people by night, shutting a noble in a stable! Scoundrels! Come to me by ones or by twos, only come! Come along; but you’ll leave your heads on the dung-heap, for I’ll hew them off, as I live.”</p>
			<p>“Cut! cut!” shouted the Cossacks.</p>
			<p>“We will burn the stable.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll burn it myself, you oxtails, and you with it.”</p>
			<p>“Several⁠—several at a time!” shouted an old Cossack. “Support the ladder, prop it with lances, take bundles of hay on your heads and go on! We must get him.”</p>
			<p>Then he mounted, and with him two comrades. The rounds began to break, the ladders bent still more; but more than twelve strong hands seized them by the sides propped by the lances, others thrust the points of lances through the opening to ward off the blows of the sabre.</p>
			<p>A few moments later three bodies fell on the heads of those standing below. Zagloba, heated by his triumph, bellowed like a buffalo, and poured out such curses as the world had never heard, and from which the souls of the Cossacks would have died within them, if fury had not begun to possess them. Some thrust their lances into the loft; others hurried on the ladders, though sure death waited them in the opening. Suddenly a shout was heard at the door, and into the stable rushed Bogun himself. He was without a cap, in trousers and shirt; in his hand was a drawn sabre, and in his eyes fire.</p>
			<p>“Through the thatch!” he shouted. “Tear the thatch apart and take him alive!”</p>
			<p>But Zagloba, seeing him, roared: “Ruffian, just come up here! I’ll cut off your nose and ears. I won’t touch your neck, for that belongs to the hangman. Well, are you afraid, my urchin?” Then Zagloba said to the Cossacks: “Tie that scoundrel for me, and you will all be pardoned. Well, gallows-bird! well, Jews’ picture! I am alone here; only show your head on this loft! Come, come! I shall be glad to see you, I’ll give you such a reception that you’ll remember it with your father the devil, and your mother a harlot.”</p>
			<p>The poles of the roof now began to crack. It was evident the Cossacks were up there and tearing through the thatch.</p>
			<p>Zagloba heard, but fear didn’t deprive him of power; he was as if drunk with the battle and with blood. “I’ll spring to the corner and perish there,” thought he.</p>
			<p>But that instant gunshots were heard in the yard. A number of Cossacks rushed to the stable. “Father! father!” they shouted. “This way!”</p>
			<p>Zagloba at the first moment did not understand what had happened, and was astonished. He looked down through the opening; there was no one there. The rafters were not cracking.</p>
			<p>“What is it? what has happened?” he cried aloud. “Ah! I understand. They want to burn the stable, and fire from pistols at the roof.”</p>
			<p>Then was heard the uproar of people, more terrible every moment, and the tramp of horses. Shouts mixed with howls and the clatter of steel.</p>
			<p>“My God, that must be a battle!” thought Zagloba, springing to the opening in the thatch. He looked, and his legs bent under him with delight.</p>
			<p>In the yard a battle was raging, and soon Zagloba beheld the terrible defeat of Bogun’s Cossacks. Attacked on a sudden, struck with fire from pistols placed at their heads and breasts, pushed to the fences, to the cottage and outhouses, cut with swords, thrown down by the rush of horses, trampled with their hoofs, the Cossacks perished almost without resistance. The ranks of red-uniformed soldiers, cutting furiously and pressing on the fugitives, did not allow them to form, to use their sabres, to draw breath, or to reach their horses. Only detached groups defended themselves. Some, favored by the disturbance, uproar, and smoke, succeeded in reaching their loosened saddle-girths, and perished before they touched the stirrups with a foot; others, throwing away lances and sabres, disappeared under the fences, got stuck between the posts, or jumped over the top, shouting and crying with unearthly voices. It seemed to the unfortunates that Prince Yeremi himself had fallen upon them unexpectedly, and was shivering them with his whole power. They had no time to come to their minds to look around. The shouts of the victors, the whistle of sabres, and the rattle of shots chased them like a storm. The hot breath of horses was on their necks. “Save yourselves, men!” was heard on every side. “Slay! kill!” was the response of the assailants.</p>
			<p>At last Zagloba saw little Volodyovski as, standing near the gate at the head of a number of soldiers, he gave directions with his baton and voice, and sometimes rushed on his gray horse into the whirl, and then the moment he turned or struck, a man fell without uttering a sound. Oh, but he was a master beyond masters, little Volodyovski, and a soldier, blood and bone! He did not lose sight of the battle, but making a correction here and there, returned again, looked and corrected, like the director of an orchestra, who at times plays himself, at times stops, watching carefully over all, so that each man may fill his part.</p>
			<p>When he saw this, Zagloba stamped on the floor of the loft till the dust rose. He clapped his hands and shouted⁠—</p>
			<p>“Slay the dog-brothers! Kill them! Flay them! Cut, slash, hew, kill! On to them, on! Sabre them to a man!”</p>
			<p>Thus he shouted and jumped till his eyes were inflamed from exertion, and he lost vision for a moment; but when he regained his eyesight he saw a still more beautiful spectacle. There, at the head of a number of Cossacks, was Bogun, rushing away on horseback like lightning, without a cap, in his shirt and trousers, and after him, at the head of his soldiers, little Volodyovski. “Slay!” shouted Zagloba; “that’s Bogun.” But his voice did not reach them. That moment Bogun with his heroes was over the fence, Volodyovski over the fence. Some remained behind; horses fell under others in the leap. Zagloba looked. Bogun is on the plain, Volodyovski is on the plain. Then the Cossacks scatter in their flight, and soldiers in their pursuit; individual pursuit begins. Zagloba’s breath died within his breast, his eyes were almost bursting through his lids; for what does he see? Volodyovski is almost on the neck of Bogun, like a hound on a wild boar. The chief turns his head, raises his sabre; they fight. Zagloba shouts. Still another moment, and Bogun falls with his horse; and Volodyovski, leaving him, hurries after the others.</p>
			<p>But Bogun is alive; he rises from the ground and runs to a pile of rocks surrounded with bushes.</p>
			<p>“Hold him! hold him!” roared Zagloba. “That’s Bogun!”</p>
			<p>Then a new band of Cossacks hurry on, who till that moment had been hiding on the other side of the rocks, but now discovered, seek a new way of escape, pushed by soldiers who are about half a furlong behind. This party comes up to Bogun, bears him away, disappears from sight in the turns of the ravine, and after it disappear the soldiers.</p>
			<p>In the yard it was silent and empty; for the soldiers of Zagloba, rescued by Volodyovski, chased after the Cossacks and pursued with the others the scattered enemy.</p>
			<p>Zagloba let down the ladder, slipped from the loft, and coming out of the stable into the yard, said, “I am free!” Then he began to look around. In the yard lay a number of Zaporojian bodies and some Poles. He walked slowly among them, and examined each carefully. At length he knelt over one of them. Soon he rose with a canteen in his hand. “It is full!” he muttered; and placing it to his mouth he raised his head. “Not bad!” Again he looked round, and again he repeated, but with a much clearer voice, “I am free!”</p>
			<p>He went to the cottage. On the threshold he came upon the body of the old cooper, whom the Cossacks had killed there. He disappeared inside. When he came out, around his hips, over a coat soiled with manure, glittered Bogun’s belt, thickly embroidered with gold; at the belt a knife with a great ruby in the hilt.</p>
			<p>“God has rewarded bravery,” he muttered, “for the belt is pretty full. Ah, you wretched robber, I have hope that you will not escape! That little hop-of-my-thumb⁠—may the bullets strike him!⁠—is a lively piece, just like a wasp. I knew he was a good soldier; but to drive Bogun as he would a white-faced mare, I did not expect that of him. That there should be such strength and courage in such a little body! Bogun might carry him on a string at his belt. May the bullets strike Volodyovski!⁠—but better, may God give him luck. He couldn’t have known Bogun, or he would have finished him. Phu! how it smells of powder here, enough to pierce the nose! But if I didn’t get out of a scrape this time such as I have never been in before! Praise to God! Well, well, but so to drive Bogun! I must examine this Volodyovski again, for it must be there is a devil sitting inside of him.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba sat on the threshold of the stable in meditation, and waited. Presently there appeared at a distance on the plain soldiers returning from the victory, and at their head rode Volodyovski. When he saw Zagloba, Volodyovski galloped up, and springing from his horse, came to him.</p>
			<p>“Do I see you once more?” called he, at a distance.</p>
			<p>“Me, in my own person,” said Zagloba. “God reward you for coming with reinforcements in time!”</p>
			<p>“Thanks be to God that I came in time!” said the little knight, pressing the palm of Zagloba with joy.</p>
			<p>“But where did you hear of the straits in which I was?”</p>
			<p>“The peasants of this place gave information.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, and I thought they betrayed me.”</p>
			<p>“Why should they? They are honest. The newly married barely got off with their lives, and what happened to the others they know not.”</p>
			<p>“If they are not traitors, then they are killed by the Cossacks. The master of the house lies near the door. But what of that? Tell me, is Bogun alive, did he escape⁠—he without a cap, in the shirt and trousers, whom you threw with his horse?”</p>
			<p>“I hit him on the head; but it is too bad that I didn’t know him. But tell me, my good Zagloba, what is the best you have done.”</p>
			<p>“What have I done?” repeated Zagloba. “Come, Pan Michael, and see.” He took him by the hand and led him into the stable. “Look at that!”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski saw nothing for a while, for he had come in from the light; but when his eyes had become used to the darkness he saw bodies lying motionless on the dung-heap. “And who cut down these men?” asked he, in astonishment.</p>
			<p>“I!” said Zagloba. “You have asked what I did. Here it is before you!”</p>
			<p>“But,” said the young officer, “how did you do it?”</p>
			<p>“I defended myself up there. They stormed me from below and through the roof. I don’t know how long it was, for in battle a man doesn’t reckon time. It was Bogun, with a strong force and chosen men. He will remember you; he will remember me too. At another time I will tell you how I fell into captivity, what I passed through, and how I settled Bogun; for I had an encounter of tongues with him. But now I am so wearied that I can scarcely stand.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” repeated Volodyovski, “it is not to be denied you defended yourself manfully; but I will say this, you are a better swordsman than general.”</p>
			<p>“Pan Michael,” said the noble, “it is no time for discussion. Better thank God, who has sent down to us today so mighty a victory, the memory of which will not soon vanish from among men.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski looked with astonishment at Zagloba, since it had appeared to him hitherto that he alone had gained that victory which Zagloba evidently wished to share with him. But he only looked, shook his head, and said, “Let it be so.”</p>
			<p>An hour later the two friends, at the head of their united parties, moved on to Yarmolintsi.</p>
			<p>Almost no one was missing from Zagloba’s men; for sprung upon in their sleep, they offered no resistance. Bogun, being sent specially for informants, had given orders not to kill, but to take prisoners.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
