<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>LIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-53" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</h2>
			<p>Old Zakhar went back to Kiev after a few days’ rest, and then came tidings that the commissioners had no great hopes of peace, or in fact almost despaired of it. They were able to obtain merely an armistice till the Russian Whitsuntide, in accordance with which a new commission was to begin, with plenary powers. But the demands and conditions put forth by Hmelnitski were so exorbitant that no one believed that the Commonwealth could agree to them. Vigorous arming was commenced therefore on both sides. Hmelnitski sent envoy after envoy to the Khan to hasten at the head of all his forces; he sent also to Stamboul, where Pan Bechinski, on behalf of the king, had resided for a considerable time. In the Commonwealth writs for the national militia were expected every moment. News came of the appointment of fresh leaders⁠—the cupbearer, Ostrorog, Lantskoronski, and Firlei⁠—and the complete removal from military affairs of Yeremi Vishnyevetski, who was able to shield the country only at the head of his own forces. Not merely the soldiers of the prince, not merely the nobles of Russia, but also the partisans of the former commanders were indignant at such a selection and such disfavor, declaring justly that if there had been political reasons for sacrificing Yeremi while there was hope of concluding a treaty, his removal in presence of war was a great, an unpardonable blunder; for he alone was able to meet Hmelnitski, and conquer that famous leader of rebellion. Finally the prince himself came to Zbaraj for the purpose of assembling as many forces as possible, to stand in readiness on the borderland of the conflict.</p>
			<p>An armistice had been concluded, but at every moment it proved of no avail. Hmelnitski ordered, it is true, the execution of some colonels stationed here and there in camps, who in spite of the armistice had permitted themselves to attack castles, and squadrons encamped in various places; but he was unable to restrain the masses of the people, and the numerous independent bands, who either had not heard of the armistice, or who knew not even the meaning of the word. They attacked therefore continually the boundaries secured by the agreement, thus breaking every engagement made by the hetman. On the other hand, the troops of private persons and of the king in pursuing robbers frequently passed the Pripet and the Goryn in the province of Kiev, continued into the depth of the province of Bratslav, and there, attacked by the Cossacks, fought regular battles, not infrequently bloody and stubborn. Hence continual complaints from the Cossacks and Poles of the violation of the armistice, which it was indeed beyond the power of man to observe. The armistice existed therefore so far as Hmelnitski on one side, and the king and hetmans on the other, had not moved into the field; but the war was raging, in fact, before the main forces had rushed to the combat, and the first warm rays of spring shone again upon burning villages, towns, cities, and castles, giving light to slaughter and human misfortune.</p>
			<p>Parties from the neighborhood of Bar, Hmelnik, and Makhnovka appeared around Zbaraj, slaying, robbing, burning. Yeremi dispersed these with the hands of his colonels; but he took no part in this small warfare himself, as he intended to move with his whole division when the hetmans should be already in the field.</p>
			<p>He sent out therefore detachments with orders to pay for blood with blood, for robbery and murder with the stake. Podbipienta went with others and gained a victory at Cherni Ostroff; but he was a knight terrible only in battle⁠—to prisoners taken with arms in their hands he was too indulgent; therefore he was not sent a second time. But in expeditions of this kind Volodyovski distinguished himself; as a partisan he had no rival save Vershul alone, for no one accomplished such lightning marches. No one knew how to approach the enemy so unexpectedly, break them up with such wild onset, scatter to the four winds, and exterminate by hunting down, hanging, and slaughtering; soon he was invested with terror and the favor of the prince. From the end of <time datetime="1649-03">March</time> to the middle of <time datetime="1649-04">April</time> Volodyovski dispersed seven independent parties, each one of which was three times stronger than his own; and he did not grow weary in his work, but showed a continually increasing eagerness, as if gaining it from the blood he was shedding.</p>
			<p>The little knight, or rather the little devil, teased Zagloba to accompany him in these expeditions, for he loved his company above all things; but the worthy noble opposed every suggestion, and thus explained his inactivity:⁠—</p>
			<p>“My stomach is too big, Pan Michael, for these struggles and encounters; and besides, each man has his special power. To strike with hussars in the thick of the enemy in the open day, break through a camp, capture standards⁠—that’s my forte, the Lord God created and fitted me for that; but to hunt a rabble in the night through the brush⁠—I leave that to you, who are as slender as a needle, and can easily push through everywhere. I am a knight of ancient date, and I prefer to tear through as the lion does, rather than creep along like a bloodhound on trails. Besides, after the evening milking I must to bed, for that is my best time.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski therefore went alone, and alone conquered, till a certain time when, going out toward the end of <time datetime="1649-04">April</time>, he returned in the middle of <time datetime="1649-05">May</time>, as woebegone and gloomy as if he had met a defeat and wasted his men. Thus it appeared to all; but in that long and difficult expedition Volodyovski had gone beyond Ostrog to the neighborhood of Golovna, and had defeated there, not a common band made up of the rabble, but several hundred Zaporojians, half of whom he killed and the other half captured. The more astonishing, therefore, was the profound gloom which as a fog covered his face, joyous by nature. But Pan Volodyovski said not a word to any man; scarcely had he dismounted when he went for a long conversation with the prince, taking two unknown knights, and then, in company with them, went to Zagloba without stopping, though those eager for news seized him by the sleeve along the way.</p>
			<p>Zagloba looked with a certain astonishment on the two gigantic men, whom he had never seen before, and whose uniform, with gilt shoulder-knots, showed that they served in the Lithuanian army. Volodyovski said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Shut the door, and give orders to admit no one, for we have to speak on affairs of importance.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba gave the order to the servant; then he began to look unquietly on the strangers, noting from their faces that they had nothing good to tell.</p>
			<p>“These are,” said Volodyovski, pointing to the young man, “the Princes Bulygi Kurtsevichi, Yuri and Andrei.”</p>
			<p>“The cousins of Helena!” cried Zagloba.</p>
			<p>The princes bowed and said both at once: “Cousins of the deceased Helena.”</p>
			<p>The ruddy face of Zagloba became pale blue in a moment. He began to beat the air with his hands as if he had been struck with a bullet. He opened his lips, unable to catch breath, rolled his eyes, and said or rather groaned: “How?”</p>
			<p>“There is news,” answered Volodyovski, gloomily, “that the princess was murdered in the monastery of Nikolai the Good.”</p>
			<p>“The mob suffocated with smoke in a cell twelve young ladies and some nuns, among whom was our cousin,” added Prince Yuri.</p>
			<p>This time Zagloba’s countenance, formerly blue, became so red that those present were afraid of apoplexy. Slowly his lids dropped over his eyes; he covered them with his hands, and from his mouth came a fresh groan: “Oh, world! world! world!” Then he was silent.</p>
			<p>But the princes and Volodyovski began to complain.</p>
			<p>“Oh, good lady, we your friends and relatives gathered together⁠—we who wished to go to save you,” said the young knight, sighing time after time; “but it is evident that we were late with our aid. Our willingness was in vain, in vain our sabres and our courage; for you are in another and better than this bad world, waiting upon the Queen of Heaven.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, cousin,” cried the gigantic Yuri, who in grief seized his hair anew, “forgive us our faults, and for every drop of your blood we will pour out three gallons.”</p>
			<p>“So help us God!” responded Andrei.</p>
			<p>The two men stretched their hands to heaven. Zagloba rose from his seat, advanced a few steps toward the bed, tottered like one drunk, and fell on his knees before the image.</p>
			<p>After a moment the bells in the castle sounded for midday⁠—sounded as gloomily as if they were death-bells.</p>
			<p>“She is no more!” said Volodyovski again. “The angels have taken her to heaven, leaving us tears and sighs.”</p>
			<p>Sobbing shook the heavy body of Zagloba, and it trembled; but they complained without ceasing, and the bells were tolling.</p>
			<p>At last Zagloba calmed himself; they had thought indeed that perhaps wearied by pain he had fallen asleep on his knees. After a time, however, he rose, stood up, sat on the bed; but he had become as it were another man. His eyes were red, bloodshot; his head drooping; his lower lip hung upon his beard; imbecility had settled on his face, and a certain unexampled decrepitude, so that it might in truth appear that the former Zagloba, lively, jovial, full of fancy, had died, and there remained only an old man weighted and wearied with years.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, in spite of the protests of the servant at the door, Podbipienta entered; and again began complaints and regrets. The Lithuanian called to mind Rozlogi, and the first meeting with the princess⁠—her sweetness, youth, beauty. At length he remembered that there was someone more unhappy than any of them⁠—her betrothed, Pan Skshetuski⁠—and he began to ask the little knight about him.</p>
			<p>“Skshetuski is with Prince Koretski, at Korets, to which place he came from Kiev; and he lies there in illness, unconscious of God’s world,” said Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Should not we go to him?” asked the Lithuanian.</p>
			<p>“There is no reason to go,” replied Volodyovski. “The prince’s physician answers for his health. Pan Sukhodolski⁠—one of Prince Dominik’s colonels, but a great friend of Skshetuski⁠—is there, and our old Zatsvilikhovski; they both have him in care and watchfulness. He lacks for nothing, and that delirium does not leave him is the better for him.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, God of power!” said the Lithuanian, “have you seen Skshetuski with your own eyes?”</p>
			<p>“I saw him; but if they had not told me that that was he, I should not have known him, pain and sickness have so devoured him.”</p>
			<p>“Did he recognize you?”</p>
			<p>“He knew me undoubtedly, though he said nothing, for he smiled and nodded his head. Such pity possessed me that I could stay no longer. Prince Koretski wishes to come here with his squadron. Zatsvilikhovski will come with him, and Pan Sukhodolski swears that he will come too, even if he has an order to the contrary from Prince Dominik. They will bring Pan Yan unless disease gets the better of him.”</p>
			<p>“And whence have you tidings of the princess’s death?” asked Pan Longin. “Have these young men brought it?” added he, pointing to the princes.</p>
			<p>“No. These knights learned all by chance in Korets, where they had come with messages from the voevoda of Vilna, and came here with me, for they had letters from the voevoda to our prince. War is certain, and nothing will come of the commission.”</p>
			<p>“We know that already ourselves, but tell us who informed you of the death of the princess?”</p>
			<p>“Zatsvilikhovski told me, and he knows it from Skshetuski. Hmelnitski gave Skshetuski permission to search for her in Kiev, and the metropolitan himself had to assist. They searched mainly in the monasteries, for those of our people who remained in Kiev are secreted in them. And they thought surely that Bogun had placed the princess in some monastery. They sought and sought and were of good heart, though they knew that the mob had suffocated twelve young ladies with smoke at Nikolai the Good. The metropolitan contended that they would not have attacked the betrothed of Bogun, but it has turned out otherwise.”</p>
			<p>“Then she was at the convent of Nikolai the Good?”</p>
			<p>“She was. Skshetuski met Pan Yoakhim Yerlich, who was hiding in a monastery; and as he had asked everyone about the princess, he asked him too. Pan Yerlich said that there were certain young ladies whom the Cossacks had taken, but at Nikolai the Good twelve remained, whom afterward they suffocated with smoke⁠—among them Kurtsevichovna. Skshetuski, since Yerlich is a hypochondriac and only half-witted from continual terror, did not believe him, and hurried off immediately a second time to Nikolai the Good to inquire. Unfortunately the nuns, three of whom were suffocated in the same cell, did not know the names, but hearing the description which Skshetuski gave, they said that she was the one. Then Skshetuski went away from Kiev and straightway fell ill.”</p>
			<p>“The only wonder is that he is still alive.”</p>
			<p>“He would have died undoubtedly but for that old Cossack who nursed him during captivity in the Saitch, and then came here with letters from him, and when he had returned, helped him again in his search. He took him to Korets and gave him into the hands of Zatsvilikhovski.”</p>
			<p>“May God protect him, for he has never yet consoled him!” said Podbipienta.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski ceased, and a silence of the grave reigned over all. The princes resting upon their elbows sat motionless with frowning brows; Podbipienta raised his eyes to heaven, and Zagloba fixed his glassy gaze on the opposite wall as if sunk in the deepest thought.</p>
			<p>“Rouse yourself!” said Volodyovski, shaking him by the shoulder. “Of what are you thinking so? You will not think out anything, and all your stratagems will be useless.”</p>
			<p>“I know that,” answered Zagloba, with a broken voice. “I am thinking that I am old, that I have nothing to do in this world.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
