<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The author uses Skshetuski, the family name of his hero, oftener than Yan, his Christian name, prefixing Pan = Mr. in both cases. I have taken the liberty of using Yan oftener than Skshetuski because more easily pronounced in English. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tear-trousers. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tear-cowl. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dog entrails. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mouse entrails. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the popular form in Little Russian; therefore it is quoted. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The right bank of the Dnieper was called Russian; the left, Tartar. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hmelnitski is made to apply the title Tsar to the Khan, either to give him more importance in the eyes of the Cossacks or because Tugai Bey was present. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The author uses sometimes the word <i>vudka</i> and sometimes <i>gorailka</i>. The first is Polish; the second Little Russian. Both mean a liquor distilled generally from rye. When <i>vudka</i> is used it might mean that the liquor was from Poland, and when <i>gorailka</i> that it was of Ukraine origin; but here the words are used indifferently. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Krívonos</i> signifies "crooked nose;" <i>Prostonos</i>, "straight nose." <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Holota" (Nakedness) was used as a nickname in those days to designate a poor nobleman. Abstract nouns were used by the Cossacks also as names; e. g., Colonel Chernota, which means "blackness." <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>City of the Tsar = Constantinople. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A pun on "Pulyan," which in Polish means "half Yan," or John. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Hmel," a nickname for Hmelnitski among the Poles, = "hops." <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Holota (Nakedness) was often given as a nickname to a poor noble. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nicknames given by Hmelnitski to the three Polish commanders. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Kapustsiani</i>, "of cabbage," the masculine form of the adjective. <i>Kapustsiana glowa</i> means "a cabbage head; a stupid fellow." <i>Glowa</i> is the ordinary word for <i>head</i> in Polish, and takes the feminine adjective ending in <i>a</i>: hence <i>Kapustsiana</i>. For explanation of the other names see list of names and places. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This means, "Everything or nothing;" "Carry the day or go to a monastery." <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Circassians from the Caucasus. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Div</i> is a Persian word for "demon" or "evil spirit." This word meant "a divinity" in times anterior to Zoroaster, and is identical with the root <i>div</i> in our word "divine." In India and Europe it retained its original signification, and became of evil import only in Persia, in consequence of the triumph of Zoroastrianism. <a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Panowie" is the plural of Pan.<a href="chapter-x.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
